In 2023 the ECB consolidated progress in its fight against inflation in the euro area. The year began with headline inflation still close to record highs. The negative effects of earlier supply and demand shocks, while easing, were still driving up prices. But two key developments paved the way for inflation to decline sharply during the year.
First, the effects of the past shocks began to fade. Energy prices, which had spiked as a consequence of Russia’s unjustified war against Ukraine, fell steeply, and global supply bottlenecks further eased. The drop in energy prices, in particular, accounted for half of the decline in inflation in 2023. Second, the ECB continued to tighten monetary policy, which helped to lower inflation further by dampening demand. Altogether, from January to September, we raised interest rates by an additional 200 basis points.
In doing so, we continued to follow a data-dependent approach to rate decisions given the highly uncertain environment. To calibrate accurately how far rates needed to rise, we introduced three criteria: the inflation outlook, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. By September, we saw the inflation outlook improving and monetary policy being transmitted forcefully. But underlying inflation remained elevated and domestic price pressures were strong.
We decided on this basis that the key ECB interest rates had reached levels that, if maintained for a sufficiently long duration, would make a substantial contribution to the timely return of inflation to our target. At the same time, we committed to holding rates at these levels for as long as necessary, while continuing to follow a data-dependent approach, based on the same criteria, to determine the appropriate level and duration of restriction.
In parallel, we advanced the normalisation of the Eurosystem balance sheet to ensure it remained consistent with our overall stance. It fell by over €1 trillion in 2023, with a large part of this decline due to maturing and early repayments under our targeted longer-term refinancing operations. We also concluded reinvestments under our asset purchase programme as the year progressed. And, in December, we announced the gradual phasing-out of reinvestments under the pandemic emergency purchase programme.
While we were consolidating progress in the fight against inflation, we advanced our work on taking account of climate-related risks within our tasks. In March we published the first climate-related financial disclosures of the Eurosystem’s corporate sector holdings. The carbon intensity of our corporate asset reinvestments fell by around two-thirds in the 12 months from October 2022 when we had started tilting them towards issuers with a better climate performance.
In 2023 we saw considerable progress in another area crucial for our work: payments. We launched our new T2 wholesale payment system in March. T2 contributes to the harmonisation and efficiency of Europe’s financial markets, introducing a new real-time gross settlement system – which replaces the TARGET2 system that had been in operation since 2007 – and streamlining liquidity management of central bank money.
We also launched the preparation phase of the digital euro project. This phase started in November after a fruitful two-year investigation phase, and will lay the foundations for the potential issuance of a digital euro. A digital euro would complement cash, not replace it. Cash remains the most frequently used means of payment among euro area citizens, and a clear majority consider it important to have the ability to pay in cash.
This is in part why the ECB is preparing a new series of euro banknotes – the most tangible, visible symbol of European unity. The Governing Council selected “European culture” and “Rivers and birds” as two potential themes for this new series, based on the outcome of two public surveys carried out in the summer of 2023. Looking ahead, European citizens will have the chance to express their preferences on a shortlist of possible designs, with the ECB expected to decide on the final designs in 2026.
In a year that marked the 25th anniversary of the ECB, we celebrated the arrival of Croatia in the euro area. Croatia’s adoption of the euro in January brought the number of countries in the euro area to 20 – almost double the number when the single currency was first launched. The euro area’s expansion reflects the continued attractiveness of our monetary union in an increasingly unpredictable world. In 2023 people’s support for the euro remained close to record high levels.
All this could not have been done without the hard work and the dedication of ECB staff to our mission: maintaining price stability for the people of the euro area. It is an honour to lead them and this institution.
The euro area unemployment rate averaged 6.5% in 2023, falling from 6.6% in January to 6.5% in March and remaining broadly stable for the remainder of the year.
Headline inflation in the euro area was 2.9% in December 2023, down from 9.2% in December 2022. The decline was increasingly broad-based across components.
The ECB raised its key interest rates by a further 200 basis points over 2023, bringing the deposit facility rate to 4%. The tightening of monetary policy was transmitted forcefully to the economy.
The Common Equity Tier 1 ratio of euro area banks stood at 15.6% in the third quarter. This was close to its highest level since the start of European banking supervision and reflected the higher profitability and de-risking of bank portfolios.
60% of euro area citizens consider having the option to pay in cash important. At the same time, just over half of euro area consumers prefer to pay by card or other electronic payment methods.
The ECB published three new sets of statistical indicators on sustainable finance, carbon emissions and physical risks as part of its broader climate action plan.
In 2023 the ECB celebrated its 25th anniversary with the message “The Value of Unity”, allowing the ECB to highlight the success of the single currency and its benefits for the people of Europe.
The carbon intensity of reinvestments decreased by more than 65% in the 12 months that followed the start of tilted reinvestments in October 2022.
1 Inflation declines sharply as the ECB’s monetary policy tightening continues to be transmitted strongly
The global economy fared better in 2023 than initially expected, continuing to expand at a moderate pace. The expansion was driven mainly by economic growth in emerging market economies and the United States, while most other advanced economies were more strongly affected by tight financing conditions and considerable geopolitical uncertainty. Global inflation declined markedly as energy commodity prices fell, while underlying price pressures remained elevated. The euro strengthened in nominal effective terms and against the US dollar.
1.1 Global economic activity expanded at a moderate pace as headline inflation declined
Global economic growth was moderate in the face of monetary policy tightening and high uncertainty
Sources: ECB, ECB staff calculations and ECB staff macroeconomic projections, March 2024Notes: “Global GDP” excludes the euro area. The pre-pandemic average is for the period from 2012 to 2019. Values for 2023 are estimates based on available data and the March 2024 ECB staff macroeconomic projections.
Global trade momentum weakened as consumption patterns normalised after the pandemic
Global trade was weak in 2023, as import growth slowed to 1.2%, well below the previous year’s growth rate of 5.5% and the pre-pandemic average of 3.1%.[3] The slowdown reflected three major trends. First, global demand moved back from goods towards services as pandemic-related restrictions were fully phased out. Second, the share of consumption, which is generally less trade-intensive than investment, in domestic demand increased. Finally, emerging market economies, where trade responds less to changes in economic activity, made a larger contribution to global activity in 2023. Despite increasing trade barriers and business survey results suggesting possible value chain relocation, evidence of fragmentation in aggregate trade flows has so far remained limited.
Annual headline consumer price index (CPI) inflation across OECD member countries excluding Türkiye declined from high levels during 2023, brought down by lower energy prices. It fell to 3.9% in December, and for the whole of 2023 stood at 5.3%, compared with 7.3% in 2022 (Chart 1.2, panel a). Inflation excluding energy and food also declined, but to a much lesser extent, indicating that underlying price pressures remained strong and broad-based. This was particularly evident in advanced economies, where tight labour markets contributed to high wage growth rates, making services price inflation more persistent (Chart 1.2, panel b).
Sources: National sources via Haver Analytics, OECD and ECB staff calculations.Notes: EA: euro area. OECD inflation excludes Türkiye and is computed on the basis of national CPIs and annual private final consumption expenditure weights expressed in purchasing power parity terms. Core inflation excludes energy and food. The latest observations are for December 2023.
Energy commodity prices declined as low demand outweighed supply constraints
The euro strengthened in nominal effective terms and against the US dollar
The major risks to the outlook for global economic growth at the end of 2023 included a further escalation of geopolitical tensions, a stronger slowdown in the Chinese economy and more persistent inflationary pressures that would require tighter monetary policy than anticipated. The materialisation of such risks would reduce global economic activity. Moreover, global commodity markets remained very sensitive to supply risks, which in turn could fuel inflation and weigh on global growth in the year ahead.
Euro area growth weakened as the effects of higher interest rates broadened
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.Notes: Retail trade is shown in real terms. The latest observations are for December 2023 for services production, otherwise for January 2024.
Construction investment broadly continued to weaken over the course of 2023. The main reason for this was the decline in residential construction investment due to high construction costs, the continued rise in mortgage interest rates and the tightening of bank lending standards, which made it more difficult for households to access finance and dampened demand for residential property. Other areas of construction, such as civil engineering, remained more resilient, supported by public infrastructure investments. At the end of 2023 construction investment was 2.1% above its pre-pandemic level, having fallen by 0.6% overall in 2023.
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.Note: The latest observations are for January 2024 for the unemployment rate, and for the fourth quarter of 2023 for employment and hours worked.
The euro area budget deficit ratio decreased as governments started to wind down discretionary support measures
The euro area general government deficit ratio continued to decrease in 2023, following a path started at the height of the pandemic (Chart 1.6).[5] The gradual tightening of fiscal policy is also reflected in the fiscal stance, which tightened moderately in 2023 for the third year in a row.[6] However, only slightly over a third of the loosening in 2020 has so far been reversed (Chart 1.6). This means that the cyclically adjusted budget balance remains well below its pre-pandemic level, owing to lasting measures adopted in the context of the pandemic in 2020 and the energy-related support provided from 2022 onwards.
Sources: Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, December 2023 and ECB calculations.Note: The measure of the fiscal stance is adjusted on the revenue side from 2021 by netting out grants from the NGEU Recovery and Resilience Facility as these revenues do not have macroeconomic tightening effects.
A further tightening of the fiscal stance would be appropriate
Decomposition of the euro area fiscal stance and discretionary measures
Sources: Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, December 2023 and ECB calculations.Notes: The measure of the fiscal stance is adjusted on the revenue side from 2021 by netting out grants from the NGEU Recovery and Resilience Facility as these revenues do not have macroeconomic tightening effects. “Other measures” mainly relates to measures adopted during the pandemic and their subsequent unwinding.
A further tightening of the fiscal stance also appears appropriate from the viewpoint of monetary policy. As the energy crisis has now largely faded, governments should continue to roll back the related support measures, which is essential to avoid driving up medium-term inflationary pressures. This would otherwise call for tighter monetary policy. Besides rolling back the pandemic and energy-related measures, governments should more generally make progress towards sounder fiscal positions to ensure that public finances are on a sustainable path.
The EU needs a robust and credible framework for economic and fiscal policy coordination
A robust EU framework for economic and fiscal policy coordination and surveillance remains crucial. After extensive discussions, the Council of the European Union agreed in 2023 on a reform of the EU’s economic governance framework, which opened the way for a trilogue between the European Commission, the EU Council and the European Parliament. 2024 will be an important year to transit towards its implementation.[7]
Labour costs became the most important contributor to domestic inflation later in the year
1.5 Credit and financing conditions tightened strongly as policy rates increased
Lower bond yields despite monetary policy tightening, reflecting a change in expectations towards the end of the year
Long-term interest rates, and the cost of borrowing for firms and for households for house purchase
Sources: Bloomberg, LSEG and ECB calculations.Notes: Monthly observations. The euro area ten-year government bond yield is a GDP-weighted average. The indicators for the cost of borrowing are calculated by aggregating short-term and long-term bank lending rates using a 24-month moving average of new business volumes. The latest observations are for December 2023.
Broad money and bank intermediation reflected the tightening of monetary policy
Bank lending rates increased steeply for firms and households as monetary policy tightened
Bank lending to households and firms weakened markedly in 2023, on the back of tighter credit conditions (Chart 1.11). Net monthly flows of loans were almost zero in the last three quarters of the year. The annual growth rate of bank loans to households declined, standing at 0.3% in December, mostly reflecting the slowdown in mortgages amid falling house prices for the first year since 2014. The annual growth rate of bank loans to firms also fell, reaching 0.4% in December, and the net flows of overall external financing to firms were at historical lows (Chart 1.12).
M3 growth and the growth of credit to firms and households
Sources: ECB and Eurostat.Notes: Firms are non-financial corporations. MFI: monetary financial institution. In “loans from non-MFIs and the rest of the world”, non-monetary financial institutions consist of other financial intermediaries, pension funds and insurance corporations. “MFI loans” and “loans from non-MFIs and the rest of the world” are corrected for loan sales and securitisation. “Other” is the difference between the total and the instruments included in the chart and consists mostly of inter-company loans and trade credit. The latest observations are for the third quarter of 2023. The annual flow for 2023 is computed as a four-quarter sum of flows from the fourth quarter of 2022 to the third quarter of 2023.
The ECB is working to better understand the macroeconomic consequences of climate change and policies to mitigate its impact, in line with commitments made following the 2020-21 monetary policy strategy review.[11] These efforts are highly relevant to the ECB’s primary mandate to maintain price stability. The complexity of climate change and the non-linear and highly uncertain nature of its effects call for enhanced macroeconomic analysis to limit forecast errors and understand the structural changes climate change is creating in the economy.
Increasing impact of heatwaves on food price inflation in Europe
Extreme weather events typically reduce output in the short run, but the total economic impact extends beyond the direct and immediate impacts that would arise, for example, through the destruction of houses, factories and machinery. Examples include disruption in other regions or sectors through supply-chain linkages or impaired infrastructure. Revenue losses in affected sectors and lower output will usually reduce demand for the products and services of other sectors. Another effect is higher uncertainty, which could lead households and businesses to reassess their views on disaster risk and therefore depress spending.
Over longer horizons climate change can also reduce output growth more persistently.[14] For example, reduced snowfall will threaten the viability of many skiing areas in Europe, and some Mediterranean regions may become too hot for summer tourism, although some northern regions may benefit. Yields in agriculture and forestry will likely be depressed by hotter average temperatures. While changing crops can alleviate some of the effects, less predictable temperature and rainfall patterns are also likely to weigh on agricultural output. Higher temperatures above the comfort zone of around 19-22°C – which are likely to occur more frequently in a warmer climate – reduce the productivity of workers.
Adaptation, i.e. adjustment to warmer climates, could help limit macroeconomic impacts. This includes, for example, installing air conditioning to reduce the impact of heat stress on labour productivity, or switching crops to limit agricultural productivity losses. However, such measures will likely have implications for government budgets and fiscal space.[15] Insurance provides a further tool for adaptation, but there is already a substantial climate insurance protection gap in Europe.[16]
Achieving emission reductions to meet the goals of the Paris Agreement and avert more catastrophic global warming requires a wide-ranging structural transformation of the economy. Capital and labour need to be reallocated across and within sectors, and even within individual firms (e.g. car makers will need to switch factories from making combustion engine cars to making battery-powered electric vehicles). The success of that reallocation will depend on the implementation of effective transition policies; the flexibility of markets and in particular the ability of the economy to finance and absorb the substantial capital investment required; the development of decarbonised technologies and the availability of skilled labour to implement them.
Analysis suggesting a benign economic impact of climate policy measures introduced to date is unlikely to capture the full picture.[17] Available model-based assessments of carbon price pathways find only a limited effect on output and inflation.[18] However, the measures included still fall substantially short of meeting the EU’s emission reduction target, and the broader impact of the transition – including effects from strengthened regulation and targets – can be less straightforward to quantify.
The speed of transition critically affects the ultimate economic impact: delaying the transition will require faster and more radical policy changes later on, increasing the probability of stranded assets and higher structural unemployment.[19] Moreover, different transition policies vary in their impact on productivity.[20] Market-based policies – such as carbon taxes – have less impact on the productivity of carbon-intensive firms than non-market-based policies (such as banning certain products or processes).
The competitiveness of the euro area economy is also affected by global choices regarding transition policies. These include higher carbon prices as well as industrial policies such as the recent Inflation Reduction Act in the United States. The EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) can trigger “carbon leakage”, i.e. the relocation of economic activity and emissions to regions with laxer emissions requirements. This can be reduced by carefully calibrating the Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism together with existing carbon leakage prevention mechanisms.[21]
Overall, climate change and mitigation policies affect nearly all aspects of macroeconomic analysis performed by central banks. Key open questions remain, related for example to the way the transition should unfold and the resultant structural changes to the economy; to the macroeconomic impact of extreme weather and risks from accelerated climate change; and to the role of nature capital and ecosystem services.
Box 2	The role of unit profits in recent domestic price pressures
This box focuses on how unit profits contributed to the dynamics of domestic price pressures in 2023 from an accounting perspective.
Domestic price pressures were very strong in 2023 but receded slightly in the course of the year as unit profits declined
Exceptional economic developments after the pandemic explain strong unit profit growth in 2022 and early 2023
Source: Eurostat and ECB calculations.Note: The latest observations are for the fourth quarter of 2023.
As exceptional factors unwound, unit profits realigned with the economic cycle and their typical buffer role
Moreover, the ECB proceeded in 2023 with the gradual removal, initiated in 2022, of its pandemic-related collateral easing measures, and the Hellenic Republic’s credit rating was upgraded to investment grade level. Throughout 2023 the Eurosystem emphasised risk management to ensure efficient policy implementation, including by diversifying the credit assessment sources it accepts. With the key interest rates having been raised to bring down inflation, the ECB incurred losses from negative interest income, which were partly offset by previously established financial buffers. The monetary income of the ECB is expected to increase again in the future, which will support its operational effectiveness.
2.1 Pursuing a restrictive monetary policy to bring inflation back to the 2% target
Inflation was still 8.6% in January, while the economy remained resilient despite mounting challenges
In early 2023 economic growth stagnated in the euro area, after a marked deceleration since mid-2022. However, the economy showed signs of resilience in the face of significant challenges from subdued global economic activity, geopolitical uncertainties owing to Russia’s war against Ukraine and high inflation along with tighter financing conditions. Headline inflation declined in January as a result of lower energy prices but remained high at 8.6%, also in light of high food prices. This was partly due to the pervasive impact of high energy costs across the economy, which also influenced food prices, alongside ongoing – although fading – pandemic-related factors such as supply chain disruptions and pent-up demand. Wage growth was also picking up.
The Governing Council raised rates in February and expressed its intention to raise them further
US banking sector turbulence fuelled uncertainty in Europe, emphasising the need for a data-dependent approach to rate decisions
It became increasingly evident that restrictive monetary policy was having a significant impact on euro area financing conditions
The Governing Council continued to raise policy rates as underlying price pressures remained high…
Headline inflation declined markedly. It dropped to 6.1% in May from 8.5% in February, with 6.9% in March and 7.0% in April. Nevertheless, while inflation was expected to decline further toward the target, largely driven by the concurrent tightening of financing conditions that was increasingly dampening demand, price pressures were still anticipated to remain too strong for too long. The Governing Council therefore opted for another two consecutive 25 basis point interest rate increases, in May and June respectively.
After the pace of reinvestment was reduced in March, July marked the end of APP reinvestments. Reinvestments under PEPP were still set to continue until at least the end of 2024. At the same time, developments since the Governing Council’s previous monetary policy meeting supported its expectation that inflation would drop further over the remainder of the year but stay above target for an extended period. On this basis, the Governing Council stayed on course to raise interest rates by an additional 25 basis points in July.
The Governing Council also decided in July to reduce the remuneration of minimum reserves from the deposit facility rate to 0%. This decision was aimed at maintaining the effectiveness of monetary policy by retaining control over the monetary policy stance while ensuring a full pass-through of interest rate decisions to money markets. It also enhanced policy efficiency by reducing overall interest expenses stemming from reserves while achieving the same degree of monetary restriction.
With inflation in August showing almost no progress from the 5.3% recorded in July, and the inflation outlook in the September ECB staff projections revised upwards for 2023 and 2024, mainly owing to a higher path for energy prices, the Governing Council increased the key ECB rates by another 25 basis points at its September meeting. This brought the cumulative increase over 2023 to 200 basis points and the deposit facility rate to 4% (Chart 2.1).
…and said that maintaining current policy rate levels for a sufficiently long duration would contribute substantially to the timely return of inflation to the target
October ended the longest period of consecutive rate hikes in the history of the euro
As the year came to a close, inflation continued to decrease, reaching 2.4% in November. At its December meeting, however, the Governing Council assessed that it was likely to temporarily rise again in the near term, owing to base effects. Underlying inflation had eased further. The Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections suggested that inflation would resume its gradual decline in 2024. At the same time domestic price pressures were seen as remaining elevated, primarily owing to strong growth in unit labour costs.
The Governing Council kept rates unchanged and decided to advance the Eurosystem’s balance sheet normalisation
Against this background, the Governing Council decided at its December meeting to keep its key rates unchanged.
The Governing Council also decided in December to advance the normalisation of the Eurosystem balance sheet. It expressed the intention to reinvest, in full, the principal payments from maturing PEPP securities until mid-2024, before reducing the portfolio by an average €7.5 billion per month until year-end and discontinuing reinvestments thereafter.
The Eurosystem balance sheet was gradually reduced, with the end of APP reinvestments and the maturing of TLTRO III operations
In 2023 the Eurosystem balance sheet continued the gradual reduction started in 2022 with the normalisation of monetary policy. It declined further as the full and partial reinvestment phases of the APP ended in February and June respectively. Under the PEPP, the Eurosystem continued full reinvestments throughout the year. By the end of 2023 the balance sheet had declined to €6.9 trillion, mainly on account of TLTRO III operations maturing as well as early repayments, and to some extent also as the APP portfolio began to be wound down.
At the end of 2023 monetary policy-related assets on the Eurosystem balance sheet amounted to €5.1 trillion, a decline of €1.2 trillion compared with the end of 2022. Loans to euro area credit institutions accounted for 6% of total assets (down from 17% at the end of 2022) and assets purchased for monetary policy purposes represented 68% of total assets (up from 62% at the end of 2022). Other financial assets on the balance sheet consisted mainly of foreign currency-denominated assets, gold and euro-denominated non-monetary policy portfolios.
On the liabilities side, the overall amount of credit institutions’ reserve holdings and recourse to the deposit facility decreased to €3.5 trillion at the end of 2023 (from €4.0 trillion at the end of 2022) and represented 51% of total liabilities (compared with 50% at the end of 2022). Banknotes in circulation were virtually unchanged at €1.6 trillion and accounted for 23% of total liabilities (up from 20%).
In 2023, following the announcement of December 2022, the Eurosystem worked on the review of its operational framework for steering short-term interest rates, which was concluded in March 2024.
Source: ECB.Notes: Positive figures refer to assets and negative figures to liabilities. The line for excess liquidity is presented as a positive figure, although it refers to the sum of the following liability items: current account holdings in excess of reserve requirements and recourse to the deposit facility.
The adoption of the euro by Croatia on 1 January 2023 and the inclusion of Hrvatska narodna banka’s balance sheet in the consolidated balance sheet of the Eurosystem increased the latter’s total assets and liabilities by €45 billion.
APP and PEPP portfolio distribution across asset classes and jurisdictions
The run-off of the asset purchase programmes was well absorbed by the market
The APP comprises four asset purchase programmes: the third covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3), the asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP), the public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and the corporate sector purchase programme (CSPP). The PEPP was introduced in 2020 in response to the pandemic. All asset categories eligible under the APP are also eligible under the PEPP; a waiver of the eligibility requirements was temporarily granted for the PEPP for securities issued by the Hellenic Republic.[25]
At the end of 2023 PEPP holdings amounted to €1.7 trillion (at amortised cost). Covered bond holdings accounted for less than 1% (€6 billion) of the total, corporate sector holdings for 3% (€46 billion) and public sector holdings for 97% (€1,614 billion).[26] The weighted average maturity of the PEPP public sector securities holdings stood at 7.3 years at the end of 2023, with some differences across jurisdictions.
The assets purchased under the PSPP, CSPP, CBPP3 and PEPP continued to be made available for securities lending to support bond and repo market liquidity. In 2023 repo market conditions improved significantly compared with the previous year, which was reflected in smaller lending volumes.
At the end of 2023 the outstanding amount of Eurosystem refinancing operations was €410 billion, representing a decline of €914 billion compared with the end of 2022. This change mainly reflects voluntary early repayments (€312.5 billion) and the maturing of operations (€612.9 billion) under the TLTRO III series. The weighted average maturity of outstanding Eurosystem refinancing operations decreased from around 10.5 months at the end of 2022 to 5.2 months at the end of 2023.
In March 2022 the ECB announced the gradual phasing-out of pandemic-related collateral easing measures. These measures were a core element of the ECB’s monetary policy response to the pandemic, making it easier for counterparties to access Eurosystem credit operations by increasing the volume of eligible collateral. The central focus of the measures was a temporary reduction in valuation haircuts across all asset classes by a fixed factor of 20% and temporary extensions to the additional credit claim (ACC) frameworks implemented by some national central banks.
The gradual phase-out started in July 2022. In a second step, which took effect from 29 June 2023, the temporary reduction in valuation haircuts for marketable and non-marketable assets was fully phased out by implementing a new haircut schedule, thus marking the return to the ECB’s pre-pandemic risk tolerance level for credit operations.[27]
In September 2023 the relevant credit rating of the Hellenic Republic was upgraded from credit quality step 4 to step 3 on the Eurosystem’s harmonised rating scale (from BB+ to BBB-), positioning all debt instruments issued by the central government of the Hellenic Republic at investment grade level.[30] The debt instruments issued by the central government of the Hellenic Republic, which previously benefited from a waiver included in the Guideline on temporary collateral measures, are therefore as of September 2023 subject to the eligibility criteria under the general collateral framework.
The nominal amount of eligible marketable assets increased by €1.2 trillion in 2023, reaching a level of €18.3 trillion at the end of the year (Chart 2.3). Central government securities continued to be the largest asset class (€9.9 trillion). Other asset classes included corporate bonds (€1.9 trillion), covered bank bonds (€1.8 trillion) and unsecured bank bonds (€2 trillion). Regional government securities (€603 billion), asset-backed securities (€600 billion) and other marketable assets (€1.4 trillion) each accounted for a comparatively small fraction of the eligible assets universe.
Source: ECB.Notes: Asset values are nominal amounts. The chart shows averages of end-of-month data for each period.
Source: ECB.For collateral, the averages of end-of-month data for each period are shown, and values are after valuation and haircuts. For outstanding credit, daily data are used.
The Eurosystem continuously manages the financial risks inherent in the implementation of its monetary policy operations. Its risk management function endeavours to attain risk efficiency, i.e. to achieve monetary policy objectives with the lowest amount of risk.[31]
Losses arose because of interest rate sensitivity mismatches between assets and liabilities
The main changes to the Eurosystem’s risk management framework in 2023 were a further diversification of its credit assessment sources and a stronger tilting of purchases of corporate sector securities towards issuers with a better climate performance.
2023 was marked by the acceptance of additional credit assessment sources within the Eurosystem Credit Assessment Framework (ECAF). The ECAF is a risk management framework employed by the Eurosystem to mitigate the credit risk of assets used in monetary policy operations. It defines the procedures, rules and techniques that ensure the Eurosystem requirement of high credit standards for all eligible assets is met on an ongoing basis. This involves the assessment, acceptance and monitoring of different types of credit assessment source.
The Bank of Greece’s in-house credit assessment system was accepted as a credit assessment source
In April 2023 the Governing Council decided to accept the Bank of Greece’s in-house credit assessment system, which provides assessments of Greek legal entities in the non-financial sector, as a credit assessment source. These assessments can now be used to determine the eligibility of credit claims on Greek non-financial corporations as collateral for Eurosystem credit operations, and valuation haircuts for them. The Bank of Greece’s in-house assessment system is one of nine national central bank credit assessment systems currently accepted by the Governing Council.
Scope Ratings GmbH was accepted as a new external credit rating agency
In November the Governing Council decided to accept Scope Ratings GmbH as an external credit assessment institution (ECAI), following a thorough Eurosystem assessment of the company’s application based on the Eurosystem’s acceptance criteria for ECAIs. The assessment encompassed quantitative and qualitative criteria, as well as any relevant supervisory feedback from the European Securities and Markets Authority. The ratings provided by Scope Ratings will be used together with the ratings of the already accepted ECAIs (DBRS Morningstar, Fitch Ratings, Moody’s and S&P Global Ratings) to determine the eligibility of collateral assets for monetary policy operations, and the valuation haircuts to be applied, once the process of integrating Scope Ratings into the Eurosystem IT infrastructure has been concluded.
Managing risks of the asset purchases in the APP and PEPP
Financial risks of asset purchases continued to be managed on the basis of specific risk control frameworks for each asset class
Box 3	The evolution of excess liquidity and its impact on the euro unsecured market rate
This box explores the repercussions of the reduction in the Eurosystem balance sheet on the euro money market. The decline in excess liquidity resulting from the balance sheet reduction has not disrupted the pass-through of changes in the key ECB interest rates to unsecured money market rates. However, an asymmetry emerged in 2023 in the reaction of the spread between the euro short-term rate (€STR) and the ECB’s deposit facility rate, which has been less responsive to the reabsorption of excess liquidity than to the earlier injection of liquidity. Preliminary analysis suggests that this phenomenon is likely to be temporary.
Lower liquidity has not narrowed the spread between the €STR and the deposit facility rate
Historical data suggests that a significant decline in excess liquidity should result in a narrowing of the spread between the €STR and the deposit facility rate. However, the recent reduction in excess liquidity has not led to a compression of this spread (Chart A, panel b), which widened until the second half of 2022 and then stabilised at around -10 basis points from November 2022 onwards. This departure from historical patterns raises questions about whether it is a temporary phenomenon or a structural shift.
Sources: ECB (market operations database), Bloomberg and Eurosystem calculations.Note: Panel a): the negative deposit facility rate period ends on 26 July 2022, with the rate moving from -0.50% to 0.00% on 27 July. Panel b): the negative deposit facility rate period (covered by this chart) is from 1 October 2019 to 26 July 2022. The zero deposit facility rate period is from 27 July to 13 September 2022. The positive deposit facility rate period starts on 14 September 2022, when the rate was increased from 0.00% to 0.75%.
The effective deactivation of the two-tier system for the remuneration of banks’ excess reserves in July 2022 resulted in an additional €1 trillion of excess liquidity becoming available for trading (Chart B, panel a). During the period of negative rates and following the introduction of the two-tier system in October 2019, excess liquidity effectively available for trading was lower than the headline figure for excess liquidity, as part of the excess liquidity held with the Eurosystem benefited from a favourable remuneration, i.e. it was exempt from negative interest rates. The end of negative policy rates in July 2022 eliminated this advantage. The release of additional tradable funds bolstered, among other things, banks’ trading in unsecured overnight deposits.
According to the money market statistical reporting (MMSR) dataset, unsecured borrowing rose from a daily average of €120 billion during the negative deposit facility rate period in 2021 and 2022 to €210 billion towards the end of 2023, with the increase involving all counterparty sectors (Chart B, panel b). The return to positive rates and the end of the two-tier system thus led to a notable increase in supply in the unsecured segment.
Sources: ECB (market operations database, MMSR), Bloomberg and Eurosystem calculations.Note: Panel a): the negative deposit facility rate period ends on 26 July 2022, with the rate moving from -0.50% to 0.00% on 27 July. “Exempt reserves” refers to the portion of excess liquidity exempt from negative remuneration under the two-tier system. Panel b): the positive deposit facility rate period starts on 14 September 2022, when the rate was increased from 0.00% to 0.75%. The turnover reflected in the chart includes all €STR overnight deposits, deposits from non-financial corporations, call accounts and some other residual borrowing with maturities up to one year. MMFs: money market funds; NFCs: non-financial corporations. “Other” includes investment funds (excluding money market funds), pension funds and insurance funds, and residual sectors.
In conclusion, the absence of a compression of the spread between the €STR and the deposit facility rate could be a temporary phenomenon as, in a context of excess supply, banks retain market power to negotiate the price of short-term deposits to cover effects on regulatory ratios. A realignment of the €STR and deposit facility rate may still occur, as excess liquidity levels will decline further, which could change the balance of power between cash demand and supply.
3 European financial sector: resilient but operating in a fragile financial stability environment
Banks in the euro area proved to be resilient in 2023, particularly in the face of bank failures in the United States and Switzerland. They benefited from progress made on several fronts, along with continued supervisory engagement. The financial stability environment nonetheless remained fragile as tighter financial conditions challenged the real economy and the financial sector. National authorities continued to implement or tighten macroprudential buffers in order to enhance the strength of the banking sector. Moreover, the regulatory frameworks for banks, as well as for financial infrastructure and innovations, were further improved to increase the long-term resilience of the financial system.
The financial stability environment in the euro area remained fragile
Tighter financial conditions and higher debt servicing costs for households, firms and governments
Euro area sovereigns, having locked in low interest rates in previous years and against the backdrop of the ECB’s Transmission Protection Instrument, saw a broad-based increase in funding costs in 2023, with limited dispersion across countries over the year. However, as governments are faced with having to roll over maturing debt at higher interest rates, their funding costs remain sensitive to the evolution of fiscal fundamentals, notably the risk of fiscal slippage, which could reignite sovereign debt sustainability concerns. At the same time, any unwarranted, disorderly sovereign debt market dynamics can be countered by flexibility in the ECB’s pandemic emergency purchase programme reinvestments and by the ECB’s Transmission Protection Instrument, if the necessary conditions are fulfilled.
Similarly, prior to and during the pandemic, the corporate sector benefited from low interest rates and its earnings held up well in 2023. As the effects of the recovery faded, credit conditions tightened and debt servicing costs went up, corporate vulnerabilities increased. Although generally still low, there was a nascent rise in corporate failures during the year. Real estate firms were particularly vulnerable owing to the ongoing downturn in euro area commercial property market.
The household sector was faced with a deterioration in debt servicing capacity in 2023, owing to rising interest rates and the ongoing correction in residential property markets. The steep increase in borrowing costs from the beginning of the monetary policy tightening cycle clearly had a negative impact on mortgage demand. That notwithstanding, a strong labour market alongside housing supply constraints underpinned an orderly cooling in residential real estate markets. Nevertheless, still elevated valuations suggest that vulnerabilities could materialise if price corrections become disorderly.
Euro area banks, funds and insurers continued to face challenges stemming from climate change in 2023. Cyber risk also required close monitoring. The increasing frequency of major natural disasters as a result of climate change, and the growing magnitude of associated losses also pushed up insurance prices amid only limited availability of insurance against climate-related hazards.[33] This underlined the risk of a greater incidence of climate shocks exacerbating profitability challenges faced by non-life insurers and widening prevailing protection gaps (the proportion of economic losses not covered by insurance), with a potential adverse impact on the macroeconomic situation and financial stability.
The ECB has the task of assessing macroprudential capital measures proposed by national authorities for banks in countries participating in the Single Supervisory Mechanism. Importantly, it also has the power to apply more stringent capital measures if necessary. The ECB’s close monitoring of national macroprudential policy stances in 2023 did not identify a need for this, as several countries had already implemented new macroprudential measures or tightened existing ones to strengthen the resilience of their banking systems to accumulated vulnerabilities and downside risks.
Preserving financial system resilience and promoting targeted macroprudential policy actions
Macroprudential buffers should be maintained to preserve banks’ resilience in case conditions in the banking sector deteriorate
In 2023 financial stability concerns shifted towards the implications of higher interest rates and downside risks to growth. From a macroprudential perspective, tighter financial conditions drove a continued downturn in the financial cycle, but systemic risks did not materialise. Notably, banks’ capital positions remained strong, although the level of capital headroom varied across banks and countries, and credit supply constraints were not linked to banks’ capital requirements. Looking ahead, higher debt servicing costs and a deteriorating macroeconomic environment could challenge the debt servicing capacity of the non-financial sectors and gradually impair banks’ asset quality. This, together with lower lending volumes and rising funding costs, could have a negative impact on banks’ profitability and resilience.
Experience from the pandemic suggests that the role of releasable macroprudential buffers should be enhanced
The ESRB continued to analyse potential sources of systemic risk and published a recommendation on commercial real estate
In 2023 the ECB provided analytical, statistical, logistical and administrative support to the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) Secretariat. Notably, the ECB co-chaired the ESRB’s Instruments Working Group (IWG), Analysis Working Group (AWG) and Task Force on Stress Testing, as well as the ECB/ESRB Project Team on climate risk monitoring. It also co-chaired the agile teams established under the AWG/Macroprudential Analysis Group (MPAG) and the IWG/Macroprudential Policy Group (MPPG) on the impact of higher inflation and rising interest rates on financial stability, and the AWG/MPAG agile team on systemic liquidity.
The ECB also supported the ESRB’s work on: (i) macroprudential tools for cyber resilience;[39] (ii) systemic implications and policy options with regard to crypto-assets and decentralised finance;[40] (iii) monitoring vulnerabilities related to NBFI;[41] (iv) policy options to address risks in corporate debt and real estate investment funds;[42] v) vulnerabilities in the commercial real estate sector, on which the ESRB published a recommendation;[43] and (vi) macroprudential frameworks for managing climate risk.[44] More detailed information can be found on the ESRB’s website and in its Annual Reports.
3.3 Microprudential activities to ensure the safety and soundness of individual banks
Banks remained resilient owing to the progress made in past years and continuous supervisory engagement
In spite of the SREP results and although European banks showed record profitability in 2023, the ECB sees no room for complacency. The gradually increasing pass-through of its policy rates to bank deposit rates and the broader increase in bank funding costs, as well as a deterioration in asset quality in the real estate sector and other interest rate sensitive sectors, could put the sustainability of high profits at risk. The ECB’s supervisory work remains focused on persistent weaknesses in risk management, governance and internal controls, and on emerging risks.
Over the course of 2023, ECB Banking Supervision became more risk-based and effective. On the basis of its internal work and the expert group recommendations, the ECB implemented a new risk tolerance framework empowering supervisors to adapt and prioritise their activities according to the individual situation of the bank under their supervision, rather than applying a one-size-fits-all approach. In the same vein, it introduced a new multi-year assessment framework for the SREP, enabling supervisors to better calibrate the intensity and frequency of their analyses. It also started to develop more timely and forceful escalation processes, building on the full range of supervisory tools, including periodic penalty payments, for instance in the field of climate-related and environmental risks.[45]
In December 2023 the ECB published the supervisory priorities for 2024-2026, which focus on (i) strengthening resilience to immediate macro-financial and geopolitical shocks, (ii) accelerating the effective remediation of shortcomings in governance and the management of climate-related and environmental risks, and (iii) furthering progress in digital transformation and building robust operational resilience frameworks.
As part of its continued efforts to enhance transparency, in 2023 the ECB published (i) its four-step approach to determine the Pillar 2 requirement on a risk-by-risk basis, (ii) the credit risk SREP methodology and market risk SREP methodology for application in the 2024 cycle, and (iii) the Guide to qualifying holding procedures; and in January 2024 it released an updated version of the Supervisory Manual, which was last published in 2018.
In April 2023 the ECB, together with the Single Resolution Board, welcomed a set of legislative changes to the European crisis management and deposit insurance framework that had been proposed by the European Commission.
In October 2023 Claudia Buch was appointed as the new Chair of the Supervisory Board of the ECB, in accordance with the established institutional selection process.
More detailed information can be found on the ECB’s banking supervision website and in the 2023 ECB Annual Report on supervisory activities.
Further progress was made in 2023 on improving the regulatory framework for the financial sector. The main achievements were (i) the agreement on the EU’s implementation of the final Basel III reforms, (ii) the initiatives to tackle climate-related risks, and (iii) the proposal to strengthen the EU’s crisis management and deposit insurance framework. Important headway was also made on regulating crypto-assets and on enhancing market infrastructure regulation, for example with regard to central clearing.
Banking regulation work focused on Basel III implementation, the EU’s sustainable finance agenda and crisis management
The discussions on completing the banking union focused on improving the EU’s crisis management and deposit insurance framework. On 18 April 2023 the European Commission published a legislative proposal aimed at strengthening bank crisis management in the EU and, in particular, at enhancing authorities’ options for handling the failure of smaller and medium-sized banks. The ECB strongly welcomed the legislative package in an opinion[51], stressing the need for better tools and funding options for crisis management. Beyond the proposed legislative package, the ECB called for further steps to complete the banking union. In particular, this requires establishing a European deposit insurance scheme and setting up a European framework for liquidity in resolution.
Important progress was made on regulating crypto-assets and improving the anti-money laundering framework
The ECB also continued to contribute actively to the finalisation of the European Commission’s proposed legislative package on anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT), including the creation of an EU-level anti-money laundering authority. As outlined in its opinions,[53] the ECB supported close cooperation and information sharing between AML/CFT supervisors and European banking supervision, and more generally, an effective EU regime to counter the misuse of the EU financial system for money laundering and terrorism financing.
Supporting the progress towards the capital markets union and strengthening the NBFI regulatory framework
Continued efforts to advance the capital markets union and regulation of the NBFI sector
Furthermore, the ECB continued to highlight the importance of addressing structural vulnerabilities in NBFI and improving the relevant policy framework from a macroprudential perspective. Reviewing recent stress episodes in the NBFI sector, policy implications for the liquidity preparedness and leverage in this sector were discussed in its Financial Stability Review and Macroprudential Bulletin.[56] The ECB was also involved in the FSB’s assessment of the financial stability implications of leverage in NBFI and actively contributed to the ongoing policy work to enhance the resilience of NBFI.[57] With regard to open-ended funds, the ECB contributed to the revision of the FSB’s policy recommendations to address structural liquidity mismatch in such funds.[58]
The Eurosystem plays a central role in developing, operating and overseeing market infrastructures and payments. In 2023 the Eurosystem successfully renewed its wholesale payment system and continued developing TARGET Services. With a view to further enhancing integration and innovation in European payments and securities markets, the Eurosystem updated its retail payments strategy and started analysing the potential impact of emerging technologies on the settlement of wholesale financial transactions. In its work on exploring a potential digital euro, the Eurosystem moved from the investigation to the preparation phase.
Approximately 1,000 banks use T2 to initiate transactions in euro, either on their own behalf or on behalf of their customers. Taking into account branches and subsidiaries, more than 40,000 banks worldwide can be reached via T2. In 2023 on average 409,444 payments per day with an average daily value of €2.2 trillion were processed using T2 and its predecessor TARGET2. This was a 2.9% increase in the daily volume of payments compared with payments made using TARGET2 in 2022.
From 1 January 2023, following Croatia’s accession to the euro area, the Croatian financial community migrated from its national RTGS system to TARGET2/T2. Onboarding of the Croatian market to TARGET Services continued in June with the migration to the TARGET Instant Payment Settlement (TIPS) service and in September, when the Croatian central securities depository (CSD) joined TARGET2-Securities (T2S).
TIPS continued to play an important role in the development of instant payments in euro, with more banks and national communities joining in 2023. The growth in the number of participants in TIPS led to a rise in transaction volumes of more than 127% compared with 2022, with a peak of 28 million instant payments settled in December 2023 (compared with 18.7 million in December 2022). Testing for the connection of Sveriges Riksbank and the Swedish krona to TIPS for instant payments in 2024 was successfully completed. The collaboration between the Eurosystem and Danmarks Nationalbank to connect the Danish krone to TIPS (and T2) in 2025 continued smoothly.
In July 2023 the Eurosystem published a new pricing structure for TIPS that entered into force on 1 January 2024. It ensures that the service operates on a cost recovery basis, without making a profit. At the same time, the pricing of TIPS aims to support the take-up of instant payments in Europe, which is also expected to accelerate, given the legislative proposal put forward by the European Commission to make instant payments in euro available to all citizens and businesses holding a bank account in the EU and in European Economic Area countries.
In addition to the three settlement services (T2, T2S and TIPS), the Eurosystem is developing a new TARGET Service, the ECMS, which will be a unified system for managing the assets used as collateral in Eurosystem credit operations for all euro area jurisdictions. The launch of the ECMS has been moved from April 2024 to November 2024 to give users more time to complete testing of the ECMS functionalities in a stable environment.
The ECB launched the preparation phase of the digital euro project
The two-year investigation phase of the digital euro project concluded in October 2023. The stocktake of the work conducted during the investigation phase formed the basis for the ECB Governing Council’s decision to launch the preparation phase. The start of this new phase does not imply a decision on whether to issue a digital euro. That decision can only be considered by the Governing Council after the adoption of the legislative framework for the digital euro at the EU level.
The first stage of the preparation phase, which started on 1 November 2023, will last two years and will lay the foundations for the potential issuance of a digital euro. During this timeframe, the focus will be on finalising the digital euro rulebook and selecting providers that could potentially develop a digital euro platform and infrastructure. The Eurosystem will also conduct further testing and experimentation, and will continue to consult with all stakeholders – including the public – to ensure that a digital euro meets the highest standards of quality, security, privacy and usability.
Possible subsequent steps will be decided by the Governing Council based on the results of the first stage of the preparation phase and developments in the legislative process.
In November 2023 the Eurosystem published an update of its retail payments strategy in the light of the significant changes in the payment landscape in the four years since its launch. In particular, Big Tech has increased activities in the payment area, potentially negatively affecting Europe’s strategic autonomy in payments. In addition, Russia’s war against Ukraine underscored the relevance of (cyber) risks to critical infrastructures in Europe, including for payment services. Moreover, considerable progress was made on the digital euro project.
Progress was made on financial integration in the area of post-trading
With a view to identifying remaining barriers to securities post-trade market integration in the EU, AMI-SeCo launched a survey among its members and the members of the National Stakeholder Groups in November 2023. AMI-SeCo also provided input to the European Commission and the European Council on the post-trade aspects of the proposal by the Commission for more efficient cross-border withholding tax procedures and communicated its views on the potential shortening of the standard T+2 securities settlement cycle to the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA).
Lastly, the Eurosystem has started analysing the potential impact of emerging technologies, including distributed ledger technology (DLT), on the settlement of wholesale financial transactions (see Box 4).
The safe and efficient functioning of financial market infrastructures (FMIs) and payments in the euro area is an ongoing priority for the Eurosystem in its oversight capacity. In addition, as central bank of issue for the euro, the Eurosystem is involved in cooperative arrangements for FMIs outside the euro area with meaningful euro-denominated activities.
As regards oversight of the Eurosystem’s TARGET Services (see Section 4.1), key priorities included monitoring the T2-T2S consolidation project ahead of its go-live in March 2023 and the onboarding of new markets. Furthermore, comprehensive assessments of T2/TIPS against the Regulation on oversight requirements for systemically important payment systems (SIPS) and of T2S against the CPMI-IOSCO Principles were launched in October 2023.
The Eurosystem also oversees other SIPS, including EURO1, STEP2-T and the MasterCard Clearing Management System (MCMS). In 2023 it focused on finalisation of the first comprehensive assessment of the MCMS against the SIPS Regulation, the launch of new comprehensive assessments of EURO1 and STEP2-T against the SIPS Regulation, assessment of the MCMS against the cyber resilience oversight expectations for financial market infrastructures (CROE) and monitoring of the EURO1 migration to the ISO 20022 standard.
With respect to payment instruments, payment schemes and payment arrangements, in 2023 the Eurosystem reached a major milestone in identifying the payment arrangements to be overseen or monitored under the Eurosystem’s framework for the oversight of electronic payment instruments, schemes and arrangements (PISA framework). In addition to onboarding newly overseen entities under the PISA framework, the Eurosystem conducted a comprehensive assessment of the first group of pan-European schemes and continued its work on card fraud monitoring.
As central bank of issue for the euro, the Eurosystem continued to be involved in cooperative oversight and crisis management arrangements for FMIs with material euro-denominated activities. As regards central counterparties (CCPs), the Eurosystem contributed to assessing risk management changes, proposals for the extension of services, recovery plans and resolution plans. With regard to securities settlement, the Eurosystem continued to give input on the regular evaluation of CSDs under the Central Securities Depository Regulation and to prepare for the future authorisation of entities operating DLT-based market infrastructures under Regulation (EU) No 2022/858 (DLT Pilot Regime Regulation).
In the area of cyber resilience, the review of the Eurosystem cyber resilience strategy for FMIs was finalised, with details on enhancements and revisions to be announced in early 2024. In addition, the ESCB conducted its periodic cyber resilience survey across 80 FMIs in the EU and initiated follow-up with the respective overseers and overseen entities.
The ECB supported various oversight-related global workstreams (for example, on CCP margining practices, FMI safeguards for financial risks unrelated to participant default and stablecoin arrangements), as well as the EU-wide CCP supervisory stress test coordinated by ESMA. The ECB also published an overview of EU CCPs’ initial margin models, continuously monitored the impact of increased market volatility on CCPs and their members and organised, together with the Deutsche Bundesbank and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the 2023 Joint Conference on CCP risk management to facilitate discussion between the industry, regulatory bodies and academia.
The Eurosystem regularly contributes to developing new EU regulations for FMIs and payments. In particular, in 2023 it provided input to the ECB Opinion on the review of the European Market Infrastructure Regulation. The ECB also actively contributed to preparing secondary legislation for the Digital Operational Resilience Act, notably in the area of threat-led penetration testing being developed in accordance with the European framework for threat intelligence-based ethical red-teaming (TIBER-EU).
The Eurosystem is analysing the potential impact of emerging technologies, including distributed ledger technology (DLT), on the settlement of wholesale financial transactions. This work is part of the Eurosystem’s efforts to ensure that central banks keep pace with and contribute to digital innovation in payments and securities settlement.
The financial industry is increasingly interested in potential applications of DLT, including for transactions that are currently settled in central bank money. If there is significant adoption of DLT by the industry, central banks may need to take action to safeguard the smooth functioning of payment systems and the role of central bank money as monetary anchor supporting the stability, integration and efficiency of the European financial system.
The Eurosystem has identified four conceptual solutions that could enable central bank money settlement of wholesale transactions where, for example, the securities leg of the transaction is settled using DLT-based infrastructure (Figure A).
Conceptual solutions for central bank money settlement of wholesale transactions registered on DLT platforms
Source: See Neuhaus, H. and Plooij, M., “Central bank money settlement of wholesale transactions in the face of technological innovation”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 8, ECB, 2023.Notes: Blue lines, dots and icons represent central bank money (CeBM). Purple lines, dots and icons represent securities.
A dedicated market contact group on DLT has been set up to support the Eurosystem’s exploratory work. This group provides expert input and keeps the Eurosystem abreast of advances in the use of DLT and other new technologies in wholesale financial markets.
5 Market operations activities and financial services provided to other institutions
The Eurosystem approved a new framework for the provision of euro liquidity lines to non-euro area central banks in August 2023 and kept in place several liquidity lines with non-euro area central banks, thereby providing a backstop to market-based funding. The ECB continued to offer US dollar operations to euro area counterparties on a regular basis. No ECB interventions took place in the foreign exchange market. The ECB remained responsible for the administration of various financial operations on behalf of the European Union and played a coordinating role in relation to the Eurosystem reserve management services framework.
The Eurosystem’s swap and repo lines are monetary policy instruments. They help prevent tensions in international funding markets from hampering the effectiveness of euro area monetary policy transmission. Table 5.1 shows the liquidity lines in operation as of 31 December 2023.
In 2023 the ECB continued to provide US dollar liquidity on a weekly basis with a seven-day tenor in coordination with the Federal Reserve System, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan and the Swiss National Bank (the swap line network). From 20 March to 30 April 2023 the frequency of the seven-day dollar providing operations was increased to daily in a coordinated manner with the central banks of the swap line network. The higher frequency was intended to enhance effectiveness and strengthened the backstop role of the operation in a period of elevated pressure in US dollar funding conditions. Borrowing by euro area counterparties remained limited throughout the year.
Source: ECB.Notes: List of central bank liquidity lines that the Eurosystem maintains (as of 31 December 2023). The table does not include repo lines established with non-euro area central banks under the Eurosystem repo facility for central banks (EUREP), for which the ECB did not disclose its counterparties. Under its new framework, the ECB has disclosed all liquidity lines since 16 January 2024.
The ECB did not intervene in the foreign exchange market in 2023. Since the inception of the euro, the ECB has intervened in the foreign exchange market twice – in 2000 and 2011. Data on foreign exchange interventions are published on a quarterly basis with a delay of one quarter on the ECB’s website and in the Statistical Data Warehouse. The information published in the quarterly table is also recapped in Table 5.2. If there were no foreign exchange interventions in the relevant quarter, this is explicitly stated.
The reporting framework covers foreign exchange interventions carried out by the ECB unilaterally and in coordination with other international authorities, as well as interventions “at the margins” within the exchange rate mechanism (ERM II).
As at 31 December 2023 the total outstanding nominal amount was €200 million under the MTFA facility, €42.8 billion under the EFSM, €98.4 billion under SURE and €39.54 billion under the loan facility agreement for Greece. Finally, in 2023 the ECB processed disbursements and interest payments of NGEU loans and grants to and from various Member States and MFA+ loans to Ukraine.
A number of Eurosystem national central banks provided services under the ERMS framework
In 2023 a comprehensive set of financial services continued to be offered within the Eurosystem reserve management services (ERMS) framework established in 2005 for the management of customers’ euro-denominated reserve assets. A number of Eurosystem national central banks provide financial services within this framework ‒ under harmonised terms and conditions and in line with market standards ‒ to central banks, monetary authorities and government agencies located outside the euro area, as well as to international organisations. The ECB performs an overall coordinating role, monitors the smooth functioning of the services, promotes changes to improve the framework and prepares related reports for the ECB’s decision-making bodies.
The number of customer accounts reported in the ERMS stood at 273 at the end of 2023, compared with 270 at the end of 2022. The total aggregated holdings (including cash assets and securities holdings) managed within the ERMS framework decreased by approximately 20% in 2023 compared with 2022.
6 Cash remains the most frequently used means of payment among European citizens, with a low level of counterfeiting
Euro banknote circulation has been affected by rises in the ECB’s key interest rates as cash holdings as a store of value decreased. A clear majority of European citizens find it important to have the option to pay in cash. Accordingly, the ECB aims to ensure effective access to and acceptance of cash in the euro area.
The Eurosystem is also committed to ensuring that cash remains as sustainable and environmentally friendly as possible and has assessed the environmental footprint of banknotes as a mean of payment. The preparations for the development of a new series of euro banknotes are an opportunity to make euro banknotes more relatable to all Europeans. The public is therefore consulted throughout the design process.
6.1 Circulation of euro banknotes and ensuring access to and acceptance of cash
Euro banknote circulation has been affected by interest rate increases
At the end of 2023 euro banknote circulation reached 29.8 billion pieces and a total value of €1.57 trillion. The increases in the ECB’s key interest rates since July 2022 have continued to have a dampening effect on holding cash as a store of value, since banknotes do not yield any interest. Accordingly, 2023 was marked by very low annual growth rates of 1.2% and -0.3% in terms of the number and value of banknotes respectively.
To maintain the quality of euro banknotes in circulation as well as trust in them, Eurosystem national central banks processed 25.3 billion euro banknotes and replaced 3.3 billion worn-out banknotes with newly printed ones.
The value of euro coin circulation grew by 3.2% annually to reach €33.5 billion at the end of 2023, equivalent to 148.2 billion euro coins.
The Product Environmental Footprint considers the full life cycle of banknotes from raw materials to manufacturing, distribution and disposal
The ECB conducted a Product Environmental Footprint study of euro banknotes to assess the environmental footprint of a person’s yearly cash payments using euro banknotes to ensure that cash remains as sustainable and environmentally friendly as possible.
The findings showed that the footprint of a person’s yearly use of euro banknotes is equivalent to driving eight kilometres by car and accounts for only 0.01% of their total annual environmental impact related to consumption activities.
The Product Environmental Footprint study also explored the progress made so far
Banknotes are reused several times once they are put into circulation. The distribution stage, including energy consumption and transportation, is the main contributor to their environmental footprint. The use of sustainable cotton in banknote paper has reduced the environmental impact of euro banknotes by almost 50% and the overall footprint of paying with euro banknotes by 3.6% compared to using conventional cotton from non-sustainable sources. Further reductions are foreseen once the move to more organic cotton takes place. Extensive research and development are underway to identify alternative waste disposal methods for banknotes, such as recycling and reusing waste material.
2023 saw one of the lowest levels of counterfeits in proportion to total banknotes in circulation
Number of counterfeits detected annually per 1 million genuine notes in circulation
The ECB is preparing to develop a new series of euro banknotes with a view to maintaining their high resilience to counterfeiting and making them as environmentally friendly as possible. This process reflects the Eurosystem’s commitment to cash and is an opportunity to make euro banknotes more relatable to all Europeans.
To ensure that the views of Europeans are reflected in the future design, the public is consulted throughout the redesign process
A multidisciplinary advisory group – with members from all euro area countries – proposed a shortlist of themes based on input from the public. The Governing Council subsequently selected seven themes, and the public was invited to express their preferences. Based on the outcome of two public surveys in summer 2023, the Governing Council selected “European culture” and “Rivers and birds” as two possible themes for future euro banknotes.
A decision on the final designs and when to produce and issue the new banknotes is expected in 2026
In addition, the Governing Council decided to establish an advisory group to propose motifs that could illustrate the selected themes by the end of 2024. After that, a competition will be held to design the new banknotes. European citizens will again have the chance to express their preferences on several design options. The ECB is expected to decide in 2026 on the final designs and on when to produce and issue the new banknotes. Once a decision to produce new banknotes has been taken, it will still be several years before the first banknotes are issued.
The ECB – assisted by the national central banks (NCBs) – develops, collects, compiles and disseminates a wide range of statistics and data needed to support the ECB’s monetary policy, as well as financial stability-related and other tasks of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the European Systemic Risk Board. These statistics are also used by public authorities, international organisations, financial market participants, the media and the general public, and help the ECB to increase the transparency of its work.
In 2023 the ECB focused on new euro area statistics, namely detailed reporting on external statistics and breakdowns on the loans, currency and deposits component of government debt. The ECB also decided to expand the reporting population for Money Market Statistical Reporting and published new statistics on financial accounts with a breakdown of life insurance and pension entitlements by investment risk. As part of its climate action plan, the ECB published climate-related indicators on its website. In addition, the Eurosystem launched a survey to assess which topics could be included in the scope of the Integrated Reporting Framework.
New details on external statistics were made available to users
In April 2023 the ECB started publishing additional details on external statistics in line with the amended ECB Guideline on external statistics, addressing the needs of users for more detailed cross-border statistics. The new series separate data for investment funds, insurance corporations and pension funds, other financial institutions, non-financial corporations, and combined households and non-profit institutions serving households. They also identify the type of debt instrument employed for direct investment. Additional details are available for debt securities, loans and trade credits and advances, and additional geographic counterparts.
New breakdowns on the loans, currency and deposits of general government debt were published
Furthermore, the ECB started to release new breakdowns for the loans, currency and deposits component of EU Member States’ government debt, which allows for a more thorough evaluation of government financing. While debt securities typically make up the largest share of government debt, loans and deposits are significant components, equivalent to about 16% of euro area GDP in 2022 and 17.5% of total government debt. The data show the various sources of funding and provide a breakdown by creditor category, including commercial banks, multilateral institutions (such as the International Monetary Fund) and the European Union institutions (for example the European Investment Bank).
The ECB decided to expand the reporting population for the euro money market statistics
In April 2023 the ECB decided to expand the reporting population for Money Market Statistical Reporting (MMSR), adding 24 new banks to the 46 banks already reporting. The new MMSR banks will start reporting on 1 July 2024. The data they provide will help make the MMSR data published by the ECB more representative. Data from the new reporting agents will be included in the calculation of the euro short-term rate (€STR) at a later stage to ensure that the newly reported data are of a sufficiently high quality. The expanded reporting population will support the representativeness, robustness and reliability of the benchmark.
The ECB published new statistics on financial accounts with a breakdown of life insurance and pension entitlements by investment risk
Following the amendment of its Guideline on the statistical reporting requirements for quarterly financial accounts, in October 2023 the ECB started publishing new breakdowns for life insurance, annuity entitlements and pension entitlements by allocation of investment risk for all EU Member States and the euro area. These entitlements are substantial components of household financial assets and are recorded in the financial accounts as liabilities of insurance corporations and pension funds (and to a much lesser extent of other sectors). The new data show to what extent households bear the investment risk of the premiums and contributions invested on their behalf.
In January 2023 the ECB published a first set of experimental and analytical climate change-related statistical indicators on its website. These indicators were collated in close cooperation with ESCB national central banks and are part of the ECB’s broader climate action plan.
The experimental sustainable finance indicators give an overview of debt instruments with sustainability characteristics that are issued or held by residents in the euro area. They provide information on the proceeds raised to finance sustainable projects and, by extension, the transition to a net-zero economy.
Analytical carbon emission indicators for financial institutions supply information on the carbon-intensity of the securities and loan portfolios of financial institutions and thus help to assess the sector’s role in financing the transition to a net-zero economy and the associated risks. The indicators provide information on banks’ exposure to counterparties with a high dependence on carbon emission-intensive business models.
Analytical indicators on the physical risks in loan and security portfolios assess risks stemming from the impact of climate change-induced natural hazards, such as floods and wildfires, on the performance of loans, bonds and equities. The indicators can be used to compare physical risk across countries, sectors and hazards.
Work continued on all three datasets to further enhance the quality of the data and breakdowns available, including geographical, sectoral and other details.
The Integrated reporting Framework (IReF) seeks to integrate existing ESCB statistical data requirements for banks as far as possible into a single, standardised reporting framework applicable across the euro area.
The IReF is a first step towards a broader initiative for an integrated reporting system for statistical, prudential and resolution data in the European Union, as requested by the European banking industry and solicited by the European Parliament and the Council. The European Banking Authority, the ECB, the Single Resolution Board and the European Commission work together in an informal coordination group to further promote such integration. In 2023 they discussed the working modalities for a Joint Bank Reporting Committee (JBRC), involving relevant European and national authorities as well as the banking industry. The JBRC is expected to be set up in 2024.
The ESCB is also cooperating closely with the banking industry to optimise reporting and reduce the overall reporting burden via the Banks’ Integrated Reporting Dictionary (BIRD). This is a voluntary and collaborative initiative that brings together the ESCB national central banks and commercial banks. BIRD – which can be accessed free of charge – helps banks to generate statistical, supervisory and resolution-related reporting output that complies with the reporting requirements set out in European legislation. BIRD is an integrated dictionary with redundancy-free content: the concepts underlying reporting obligations are all identified and described once, helping banks to decide which data to extract from their internal systems and how to process them.
One of BIRD’s first deliverables will be to help banks comply with the IReF – a new data collection framework that will apply consistently across all euro area countries. Reporting agents will be able to use BIRD for IReF reporting, as well as other reporting obligations. BIRD will help to reduce banks’ reporting burden and improve the quality of the data reported to the relevant authorities.
New experimental statistics provide quarterly information on households’ wealth distribution in the euro area in line with national accounts.
The DWA provide data on net wealth and total assets and liabilities, and their components. Households are broken down into the top five deciles of net wealth and the bottom 50% as well as by employment and housing status. The DWA dataset also includes the Gini coefficient for net wealth, data on median and mean net wealth, the share of net wealth held by the bottom 50%, top 10% and top 5% of households, as well as the debt-to-asset ratio by household net wealth decile.
Changes in housing wealth by net wealth decile and share in net wealth by the top 5%, euro area
The amended ECB Regulation on payments statistics came into effect on 1 January 2022. The enhancements compared with the previous legal framework reflect both developments in the payments landscape and relevant changes to EU legislation. The frequency of data collection has also increased from annual to semi-annual and quarterly. The first release of payments statistics data collected under the amended framework took place on 9 November 2023 via the ECB Data Portal. Data were published for all quarters of 2022 and for the first two quarters of 2023, and for the two halves of 2022.
The payment statistics made available on a semi-annual basis now include information on innovative retail payment services, such as payments using mobile devices, contactless payments, e-commerce and new types of payment services as defined in the revised Payment Services Directive (PSD2). A press release is published with each half-yearly dissemination. As part of the enhanced data collection, data in the ECB Data Portal show, among other things, the strong demand for contactless card payments, which in the first half of 2023 accounted for 57% of all card payments in the euro area (Chart A).
Share of contactless card payments as a percentage of all card payments in the euro area in the first half of 2023
Additionally, data are collected on fraudulent payment transactions, authentication methods for payment transactions and on payment schemes. On a quarterly basis and for the purposes of monitoring cross-border trade, data with a worldwide individual country breakdown are collected on card-based payment transactions, with further breakdowns by merchant category code.
The HFCN released the results of the fourth (2021) wave of the Household Finance and Consumption Survey (HFCS) in July 2023. The HFCS is a useful source of household-level information on household finances and consumption for several research projects conducted by HFCN members, the ECB’s Research Taskforce on Heterogeneity and external researchers. These projects include work on the distributional effects of inflation shocks on household balance sheets,[68] differences in holdings of wealth between men and women (the gender wealth gap), measuring income uncertainty using expectations data, the heterogeneity of the effects of the pandemic on household finances, and the new Distributional Wealth Accounts (see Box 5).
In 2023 ECB staff published 120 papers in the ECB’s Working Paper Series. In addition, more policy-oriented or methodological studies were published in the ECB’s Occasional Paper Series, Statistics Paper Series and Discussion Paper Series. Many of the ECB’s research activities also resulted in publications in renowned academic journals, while 12 articles were released in the ECB’s Research Bulletin targeting a more general audience. Box 7 describes in more detail the results of recent ECB work on the economic dynamics after extreme events – a topic of great importance for both price and financial stability.
Box 7	Economic dynamics after extreme events – quantifying the financial stability trade-offs for monetary policy during periods of high inflation
Recent research has focused on developing and applying new tools to assess and quantify the link between monetary policy and macroeconomic tail risks. Financial stability conditions and balance sheet capacity in the financial sector play a crucial role for macroeconomic tail risks, in line with an increasing body of evidence identifying financial distress as a strong predictor for near-term downside risks to growth. Furthermore, monetary interventions can affect financial stability in the short term through their immediate impact on the financial sector, both by providing financial intermediaries with liquidity during crises and risking sudden market disorder as rates are hiked and financing conditions tightened.[73]
The analysis revealed substantial downside risks to economic growth as of the third quarter of 2022. The model estimates a 10% probability that real GDP in the euro area would decline by more than 3% over the following year. Risks to financial stability were also tilted to the downside, with an elevated probability of stress in the financial system. These risks, driven by the jump in commodity prices and financial market stress following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, had to be balanced with upside risks to inflation, which was well above target.
Policy tightening above market expectations would have amplified short-term downside risks to growth and financial stability. This is because the probability of short-term financial distress is particularly sensitive to monetary policy. In the medium term, however, tighter monetary policy may also dampen financial stability risks by reducing the leverage of the financial system and raising risk premia across financial assets. The model quantifies the effects of tighter monetary policy on higher near-term and lower medium-term risks to the financial system and real economy.
This chapter deals with the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) concerning the ECB, provides information on ECB opinions and cases of non-compliance with the obligation to consult the ECB on draft legislation falling within its fields of competence. It also reports on the ECB’s monitoring of compliance with the prohibition of monetary financing and privileged access.
9.1 Jurisdiction of the Court of Justice of the European Union concerning the ECB
The CJEU put an end to more than a decade of litigation relating to the 2012 restructuring of the Greek public debt by dismissing the appeal on the last pending action for damages against the ECB
The CJEU interpreted that the ECB’s minimum standards for checking the fitness of euro banknotes do not apply to cash handlers, such as credit institutions and transporters of funds
The CJEU confirmed limits on the judicial review of banking supervisory decisions based on a broad discretion
The Court confirmed that the ECB has exclusive competence to withdraw banking licences, including for serious breaches of national AML/TF legislation
In September 2023 the CJEU[77] dismissed the appeal of Versobank AS against the judgment of the General Court of 6 October 2021, which had rejected the annulment action against the ECB’s decision to withdraw the bank’s authorisation to operate as a credit institution. In this judgment, the CJEU confirmed that the ECB has exclusive competence to withdraw the banking licence of all credit institutions established in participating Member States, regardless of their classification as significant institutions or less significant institutions, including on grounds relating to serious breaches of the national legislation transposing the AML Directive.
Articles 127(4) and 282(5) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union require that the ECB be consulted on any proposed EU or draft national legislation falling within its fields of competence. All ECB opinions are published on EUR-Lex. In 2023 the ECB adopted 12 opinions on proposed Union legal acts and 35 opinions on draft national legislation.
There were 12 cases of non-compliance with the obligation to consult the ECB on draft legislation
Twelve cases of non-compliance with the obligation to consult the ECB on draft legislation were recorded: two in respect of Union legal acts and ten in respect of national laws. The ECB adopted own initiative opinions in respect of seven of these twelve cases.
The final national non-compliance case is a Spanish case concerning a law requiring the Banco de España to take the necessary measures to make it possible for investment firms to open accounts with the central bank in order to deposit the funds they receive from their customers. This case was considered to be clear and important because, apart from its direct impact on the operation of payment systems, it might raise issues relating to monetary policy and financial stability.
The ECB adopted 12 opinions on EU legislative proposals, covering topics such as a digital euro; the legal tender of euro banknotes and coins; the reform of economic governance in the Union; the Union’s crisis management and deposit insurance framework; measures to mitigate excessive exposures to third-country central counterparties (CCPs), improve the efficiency of Union clearing markets, and address the treatment of concentration risk towards CCPs and counterparty risk on centrally cleared derivative transactions; instant credit transfers in euro; climate-related matters, including the energy performance of buildings, corporate sustainability due diligence, and the transparency and integrity of environmental, social and governance rating activities; European Union labour market statistics on businesses; and the appointment of a new member of the ECB’s Executive Board.
With regard to opinions on national legislation, which often cover more than one subject, the ECB adopted 19 opinions concerning NCBs; 15 opinions concerning the stability of the financial system; 13 opinions concerning the prudential supervision of credit institutions; seven opinions concerning currency matters and means of payment; five opinions concerning monetary policy instruments and operations and the implementation of monetary policy; and three opinions concerning payment and/or securities settlement systems. The topic of special purpose bank tax and levies introduced in response to increased inflation and interest rates was the subject of seven opinions in the course of 2023.
9.3 Compliance with the prohibition of monetary financing and privileged access
The ECB also monitors the EU central banks’ secondary market purchases of debt instruments issued by the domestic public sector, the public sector of other Member States and EU institutions and bodies. According to the recitals of Council Regulation (EC) No 3603/93, the acquisition of public sector debt instruments in the secondary market must not be used to circumvent the objective of Article 123 of the Treaty.
The prohibitions laid down in Articles 123 and 124 of the Treaty were in general respected
The ECB’s monitoring exercise conducted for 2023 confirmed that Articles 123 and 124 of the Treaty were in general respected.
The ECB will continue monitoring the involvement of the Magyar Nemzeti Bank in the Budapest Stock Exchange as the purchase of the majority ownership of the Budapest Stock Exchange by the Magyar Nemzeti Bank in 2015 may still be seen as giving rise to monetary financing concerns.
The Central Bank of Ireland’s final disposal of assets related to the Irish Bank Resolution Corporation during 2023 through sales of long-duration floating rate notes has brought to an end the serious monetary financing concerns that had persisted since 2013.
The financing by NCBs of obligations falling upon the public sector vis-à-vis the International Monetary Fund (IMF) is not considered as monetary financing provided it results in foreign claims that have all characteristics of reserve assets. However, financial donations as provided in previous years by the Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique and Banque de France via the IMF for debt relief for heavily indebted poor countries did not result in any foreign claims and therefore require corrective measures.
Furthermore, the ECB interacted closely with the ECON Committee in the context of its work on a digital euro. In 2023 the then Executive Board Member Mr Panetta participated in three ad hoc hearings of the ECON Committee to discuss progress made during the digital euro investigation phase, including the topics of user experience, legal tender, and the digital euro legislative process.[78] The ECB also organised staff-level technical seminars with the European Parliament and participated in events organised by Members of the European Parliament to discuss a digital euro.
Support for the euro was close to a record high in 2023
According to the latest Eurobarometer survey conducted in October and November 2023, 79% of euro area respondents support the euro and 43% tend to trust the ECB. The high level of support for the euro is a very positive sign, while the relatively lower level of trust in the ECB shows that the institution needs to continue its efforts to communicate with the public and citizens’ elected representatives. Building public trust will also remain integral for the ECB going forward. As such, the ECB remains committed to actively participating in constructive dialogue with the European Parliament and citizens in the euro area.
The G20 operated amid heightened geopolitical tensions and in a difficult global environment, working towards preserving multilateralism
Policy issues related to the IMF and the international financial architecture
The ECB actively contributed to discussions at the IMF. In 2023 the IMF decided to increase its quota resources, continued to adjust its toolkit and further supported Ukraine
The ECB continued to play an active role in discussions about the international monetary and financial system at the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and in other fora, promoting the central bank perspective in common European positions taken in these fora.[79] In 2023 key topics included the review of IMF quotas, adjustments to the IMF’s lending policies and toolkit, and matters surrounding Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) and their channelling.
The ECB’s primary objective, maintaining price stability, is established in Article 127(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. The Treaty further stipulates that, “without prejudice to the objective of price stability”, the ECB shall also support the general economic policies in the European Union with a view to contributing to the achievement of the Union’s objectives, as laid down in Article 3 of the Treaty on European Union.[83] This box explains how the secondary objective is considered in the conduct of the ECB’s monetary policy and reporting activities.[84]
How the ECB acts upon its secondary objective in monetary policy decisions
How the ECB presents the effects of its actions on the secondary objective
The ECB carries out key work on environmental, social and governance (ESG) issues. For a public institution like the ECB, this includes its accountability vis-à-vis European Union (EU) citizens and their elected representatives, communicating and engaging with different audiences, adhering to the highest ethical standards and transparency, empowering employees and promoting their well-being, as well as looking at climate and environmental impacts and risks.
The ECB continued its work on environmental, social and governance-related topics in 2023
This overview of key ESG developments in 2023 is complemented by other sections of this annual report and additional information available on the ECB’s website (Table 11.1).
Climate-related risks are progressively being integrated into the overall risk framework
The ECB tackles ESG risks as part of its risk management frameworks for financial and non-financial risks, as described in the chapter on risk management in the ECB’s Annual Accounts 2023.
Climate stress testing started in 2022 and has since become a regular exercise. It forms part of the action to progressively integrate climate-related risks into the overall risk framework. In its first climate risk stress test of the Eurosystem balance sheet, the ECB assessed the sensitivity of the Eurosystem’s financial risk profile to climate change and in doing so enhanced the Eurosystem’s climate risk assessment capabilities. The results provided a first estimate of the impact of climate risk on the ECB’s balance sheet.
Awareness of ethics and integrity remained a key priority in 2023
Increased awareness in the areas of ethics and integrity and easy access to ethical advice led to a pronounced increase in requests from 1,690 in 2022 to 2,767 in 2023 (Chart 11.1).
The compliance checks, which were conducted with the support of an external audit firm, confirmed the overall adherence of ECB staff members and the ECB members of high-level bodies to the rules on private financial transactions.
The ECB’s independent Ethics Committee complements the ECB’s governance structure. It provides advice to high-level ECB officials on questions of ethics, mostly concerning private activities and post-mandate gainful employment, and assesses their declarations of interests. In addition, the Ethics Committee monitors European and international developments in the field of ethics and good conduct. It also advises on desirable updates of the ECB’s ethics framework for high-level ECB officials, such as the recent enhancement of the rules on private financial transactions.
The Ethics and Compliance Committee continued to provide support to the national central banks and national competent authorities on the implementation of the Ethics Guidelines adopted in 2021, as well as guidance on a coherent and consistent interpretation of ethics standards across the Eurosystem. In addition, to best leverage and benefit from a diversity of views, the Committee organised sessions on topics of mutual interest, which were attended by over 50 different public institutions and organisations.
At the European level, in 2023 the ECB continued to play an active role in the ongoing interinstitutional negotiations on the establishment of an independent EU ethics body.
At international level, the ECB was closely involved in knowledge-sharing and standard-setting in the Ethics Network of Multilateral Organizations, in both its role as Vice-Chair of the network and through its contributions to meetings and the annual conference. The ECB also contributed to the first review of the EU’s implementation of the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
Falling, but still much too high, inflation and the increasingly tangible effects of the ECB policy tightening on the economy created a challenging communications environment for the ECB in 2023. In times of exceptional uncertainty and a cost-of-living crisis, the focus of ECB communication had to be on reassuring people and businesses about its commitment to bring inflation back to target and convince them that it would be able to do so with the key policy tools at its disposal.
The ECB’s guiding principle for communications was “Explain, Explain, Explain” to help people understand its decisions
The ECB therefore stepped up its monetary policy communication. As monetary policy tightening started to produce its intended effect of dampening demand, it was important to explain the ECB’s decisions, and re-emphasise that its primary mandate is to fight inflation. Alongside multiple public speaking engagements by ECB decision-makers, several posts on The ECB Blog explained how inflation affected real incomes and the importance of governments’ structural policies for tackling inflation, and provided analytical insights on record high labour participation levels. ECB podcasts described the drivers of inflation and, through a dedicated podcast summer school, elaborated on the ECB’s role in keeping prices stable.
At the same time, legitimate questions about why the ECB had failed to foresee the inflation surge and why its macroeconomic projections had been off the mark required answers. The clarity and accuracy of the Eurosystem projections are especially important to anchor expectations and bolster the credibility of ECB policy. Similarly, it was essential to explain the various sources of uncertainty and communicate with a sense of humility as a means of fostering trust.
ECB communications strived to put balance sheet losses of the ECB and Eurosystem central banks into context
In 2023, as a consequence of past monetary policy decisions, notably large-scale asset purchases, the ECB and other central banks across the Eurosystem were confronted with losses on their balance sheets. The ECB made a special effort to explain where central bank profits and losses come from, for instance, via a dedicated explainer. This also allowed the ECB to place those losses in the context of many years of significant profits and to emphasise that its job is to take monetary policy decisions that further its price stability objective, and not to make profits.
Further extraordinary communications efforts in 2023 centred on the future of our currency, both in the form of cash and in a digital form.
The ECB started work on designing the next series of euro banknotes with the help of the European public
The ECB stressed that cash is here to stay – potentially complemented by a digital euro
Conveying its commitment to cash in 2023 was especially important, because the ECB is preparing for a possible introduction of a digital euro.
Overall, these combined efforts and the ensuing broad media coverage succeeded in publicising the digital euro project and building further understanding. Analysis shows that while, at first, interest in a digital euro was greatest among younger generations of Europeans, awareness and understanding have now spread across all age groups.
2023 was also the year in which the ECB celebrated its 25th anniversary. On that occasion, the ECB organised an event attended by the top representatives of European Union institutions, the ECB’s host country, Germany, and other euro area countries, as well as by former ECB presidents, Jean-Claude Trichet and Mario Draghi. In addition, at the end of 2023 and start of 2024 the ECB, together with other EU institutions, jointly commemorated 25 years of the euro. These historical milestones allowed the ECB to highlight the success of the single currency, its benefits for the people of Europe as a beacon of stability around the world and a symbol of European unity.
Connecting with younger people through the “Stability is our thing” social media campaign
With a view to connecting with younger people in particular, in 2023 the ECB ran the “Stability is our thing” campaign on social media. This aimed to explain in an interactive and personal way core aspects about the ECB and its work: the price stability target, the role of banking supervision and how the ECB’s decisions affect everyday life. The campaign posts were seen 166 million times and reached 43 million young people.
There were more public access requests compared with 2022, including a marked increase for access to documents on institutional and governance topics
Public access to ECB documents is an integral component of the ECB’s transparency policy. It promotes the ECB's openness and enhances its democratic legitimacy.
In 2023 the ECB received more requests (73 requests) for access to documents compared with 2022 (63 requests). Whereas requests continued to cover a wide range of topics, including supervisory issues or high-profile initiatives like the digital euro project, there was a marked increase in requests for access to documents on institutional and governance topics, reflecting greater public interest in such matters.
In line with the ECB’s commitment to transparency, documents released in response to requests for public access were generally made available via the ECB’s Public Register of Documents. Moreover, with a view to enhancing transparency, the ECB prepared an overview of the topics covered in requests for access to documents received by the ECB since 2004.
No findings of maladministration were raised by the European Ombudsman regarding the ECB’s handling of public access requests.
The ECB’s initiatives to support transparency, openness and closeness to citizens were acknowledged through its nomination to the shortlist for the European Ombudsman’s Award for Good Administration 2023 for “helping EU citizens understand monetary policy in times of high inflation”.
In the context of the gradual return to the office from 2022 onwards, the ECB focused on policies and programmes to support work-life balance, staff development and organisational resilience. A new teleworking policy was put in place in January 2023 that supports flexibility for staff and trainees. In 2023 the new virtual learning platform, EUREKA, was made available to institutions across the European System of Central Banks and Single Supervisory Mechanism, providing even more access to learning and mobility opportunities. In line with its objective of establishing a culture of lived inclusion, the ECB appointed a mediator and an HR diversity and inclusion adviser.
Following a transition phase in 2022, a new teleworking policy took effect on 1 January 2023. Based on the overall positive experiences during the period of remote working, the new policy provides flexible teleworking options to staff. It allows all ECB staff and trainees to telework up to 110 days per year, subject to compatibility with business needs.
Training was offered to cultivate an enduring culture of mutual respect
The ECB places value on listening to staff and conducted a pulse survey at the beginning of 2023. Survey results showed that staff remained engaged, committed and connected to the work of the ECB. However, there is still work to be done to strengthen working culture. As a follow-up to the survey, the Executive Board championed an initiative to promote an organisational culture in which employees learn to respond effectively to inappropriate behaviour. Interactive workshops were introduced to help strengthen a “speak up” culture and how we all work together.
The ECB continued its Leadership Growth Programme to develop leadership competencies and increase leadership effectiveness. Furthermore, it organised the last seven cohorts of the Women’s Leadership Programme, a successful programme launched in 2014 aimed at achieving a higher representation of women at the ECB. Another important development opportunity was offered in the form of the Mentoring Portal, which allows staff and trainees to offer mentoring and look for mentors. By the end of 2023 it had recorded nearly 100 mentor-mentee relationships.
Key initiatives were launched as part of the ESCB and SSM learning and development strategy
Further key initiatives were launched as part of the ESCB & SSM Learning & Development Strategy. NCAs and NCBs were onboarded to EUREKA, which provides access to a wide range of ESCB and SSM-wide learning and development opportunities. The flagship Central Banking & Banking Supervision Executive Education Programme was launched in October 2023. Two successful “hackathons” took place in the course of the year with participants from across the ESCB and SSM. The first hackathon took place in February on the topic of decentralised finance and a second one on climate change was held at the ECB’s premises in November.
By offering a traineeship programme, the ECB promotes European integration of young graduate students and gives them an opportunity to acquire practical experience and put into practice the knowledge they have acquired during their studies. At the same time, the ECB benefits from trainees’ knowledge of the current state of academic research as well as their enthusiasm and fresh ideas. As of 1 December 2023 the traineeship grant increased to €1,170 per month, and to €2,120 for PhD students having completed at least two years of their PhD studies for traineeship vacancies at that level. Trainees also receive accommodation benefits.
Mirroring European society and establishing a culture of lived inclusion is a long-term endeavour. To achieve this, the ECB strengthened its institutional basis by supporting its six grass roots diversity and inclusion (D&I) networks and rolling out its inclusion learning programme for staff, teams and leaders. To enable a culture based on inclusion, mutual respect and psychological safety, two new roles were created: as of 2023 the new Mediator prevents and addresses workplace frictions through assisted dialogue, and the new HR D&I Adviser applies a D&I lens to all people and culture topics.
Throughout 2023 the ECB kept gender diversity high on its agenda while embracing all facets of diversity and fostering an inclusive culture. This is reflected in EDGE Move & EDGEplus certification, the ECB’s progress on the 2020-2026 gender targets, the introduction of paid parental leave for the co-parent not giving birth, piloting of a traineeship for talent on the autism spectrum, awareness sessions and events on race and ethnicity, allyship, disability and LGBT+ inclusion.
Tapping into the best talent of Europe, the ECB joined several career fairs for underrepresented groups, for example Europe’s largest career fair for black and people of colour organised by ADAN (Afro Deutsches Akademiker Netzwerk), the Sticks & Stones careers fair for LGBTIQ+ talent and allies and the herCAREER fair for women’s career advancement. To attract applicants with disabilities, the ECB promoted its vacancies on the myAbility platform. Strengthening its female pipeline and being inclusive of different socioeconomic backgrounds, the ECB continued to offer its ECB Scholarship for Women. In addition, and in a continued show of solidarity and support, the ECB launched a scholarship for 15 Ukrainian students enrolled in a Master’s degree in Ukraine.
Understanding the implications of climate change and the transition needs for the economy and financial sector is essential for the ECB to deliver on its mandate
Climate change is advancing, and the longer we wait to reduce our emissions and to transition to a greener economy, the higher the costs.[91],[92] Despite the progress made, the world is still not on track to limit the global temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels.[93] This means that the risks related to a changing climate and from an abrupt transition are growing, with impacts on monetary policy and the stability of the financial and banking systems. It is therefore essential for the ECB to understand the implications for the economy and financial sector to deliver on its mandate.
That is why the ECB, under the coordination of the climate change centre, continued to work on its climate agenda in cooperation with internal stakeholders and with the Eurosystem via relevant committees and dedicated fora on climate. In 2023 the ECB continued to integrate the objectives and environmental considerations of the European Climate Law into its strategy-setting, projects and policymaking processes.
In the past year the ECB worked on its climate and nature plan for 2024-2025, which outlines the activities it will work on in order to achieve its strategic climate objectives. It also identified three focus areas for action: navigating the transition to a green economy, understanding the increased physical impact of climate change and advancing work on nature-related risks.
Concrete advances were made on multiple fronts, covering a wide range of the ECB’s tasks (Figure 11.3).
The ECB explored the economic and financial impact of climate change and the implications for its tasks
In an effort to improve the availability of climate data, the European System of Central Banks published climate change-related indicators on sustainable finance, greenhouse gas emissions and physical risk (see Section 7.2).
The ECB is working on better understanding climate-related risks to the economy and financial systems, and developing an adequate macroprudential response
With regard to ECB banking supervision, although the credit institutions supervised under the Single Supervisory Mechanism made meaningful progress in their climate and environmental-related risk management practices, a number of institutions did not achieve the progress expected for March 2023. The ECB will continue to closely monitor banks’ progress and, if needed, take enforcement actions.[95]
The ECB is working on improving the safety and sustainability of euro banknotes
Over the years the ECB has continuously improved the safety and sustainability of euro banknotes throughout the cash cycle.[96] In 2023 it published the environmental footprint study of euro banknotes as a payment instrument. The future euro banknotes are being developed in line with eco-design principles, meaning that environmental aspects are considered at all stages of the banknote development process (see Section 6.2).
The ECB is analysing and contributing to policy discussions to scale up sustainable finance at EU and international level
Since 2021 ECB staff members have contributed to training courses and multilateral technical workshops with central banking peers and stakeholders outside the European Union. It also participated in numerous working groups and events with central banks and other institutions and fora to advance the climate agenda and profit from regular exchanges. These include the NGFS, the Financial Stability Board, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the European Supervisory Authorities and the European Systemic Risk Board, the Bank for International Settlements, the G7, G20 and the International Monetary Fund.
Innovative research by the ECB investigated nature-related risks, the climate-nature nexus and their impact on the economy
Innovative research on nature-related risks showed that degradation of ecosystems will pose challenges for companies and potentially propagate to banks, as almost 75% of corporate loans in the euro area (nearly €3.24 trillion) are issued to borrowers with a high level of dependency on ecosystem services. Additionally, the ECB explored for the first time transition risks and the climate-nature nexus. Taking into account climate change and land-use change as primary drivers of biodiversity loss, the impact of euro area companies on nature is equivalent to the loss of 582 million hectares of “pristine” habitats worldwide. The research highlights the importance of integrating climate change and nature loss in risk assessment frameworks, as they are inextricably linked.
Work is undergoing to improve the environmental performance of the ECB’s own operations and non-monetary policy portfolios
In March 2023 the ECB started publishing its annual climate-related financial disclosures of its non-monetary policy portfolios in addition to its annual environmental statement, which together give an overview of the ECB’s own operational environmental impacts and the carbon footprint of its financed emissions as well as the related targets.[97] Updated data on the ECB’s environmental performance in 2023 will be made available in the course of 2024.
In 2023 the ECB continued to make progress on developing and implementing innovative solutions that enhance the efficiency of its processes. Digital solutions, including artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning, robots and chatbots have been deployed throughout the organisation.
On the central banking side, AI was deployed at the ECB to deepen understanding of price-setting behaviour and inflation dynamics in the European Union (EU). Web scraping and machine learning was applied to assemble a huge amount of real-time data on individual product prices.[98] On the banking supervision side, the SupTech programme initiated in 2019 has provided 14 tools that help supervisors collect and analyse large volumes of quantitative and qualitative data, automatise processes, better collaborate, and use AI to speed up and sharpen supervisory analysis.[99]
Finally, innovation is strongly promoted by the Executive Board. In February 2023 Executive Board members participated for the first time in an Innovation Forum with a physical “market place-style” format and live and interactive demonstrations of a sample of major ECB innovation projects.
My career pathway at the ECB has been remarkably formative. It began with a leap of faith, with a new job in a new country. I joined the ECB at its cusp, as a young Research Analyst in the still-developing Statistics Function. With just a few hundred employees, the ECB needed “all hands on deck”, so we juggled multiple roles. A typical day was diverse: I discussed requirements with policy areas, designed statistical frameworks, programmed code and drafted the occasional speech. With institutional policies still in their infancy, I was also thrilled to see my creative solutions often rapidly deployed.
As the ECB matured, avenues for professional growth opened up. I worked in several different areas within Statistics and was able to deepen my levels of expertise and seniority. Particularly memorable responsibilities included being lead for country visits to our counterpart national central banks and national competent authorities to foster relationships and advise on their reporting preparations as new members of the euro area.
I am now in the newly established Data Office, which aims to optimise institutional data management (including in areas like artificial intelligence) and reports to the Chief Data Officer. I also contribute to the Diversity and Inclusion Forum. These are transversal roles and it is satisfying to work with varied groups and to help shape and influence broader ECB policies.
There have been setbacks, for instance Brexit comes to mind, given the uncertainties it raised about working here but, ultimately, thanks to a dynamic environment, motivated colleagues and continued prospects for development, it is the triumphs that I recall the most.
I have strong memories of the build up to the ceremony to mark the inauguration of the ECB in June 1998. I was one of a small team of organisers for this major event. There was great enthusiasm and a sense of camaraderie among the team. This was in the face of all the organisational challenges that go with setting up a new institution that would quickly have to find its feet. For several years afterwards, I enjoyed helping to organise both public and staff events at the ECB as the range and scale of events continued to expand and evolve.
Fast forward to today: I now work in the Language Services Division, after taking up an internal mobility opportunity in 2016. I look after budgeting, procurement and vendor management tasks related to translation and editing, ensuring adequate cover across the 24 official languages of the European Union. These support functions play a crucial role in assisting the ECB to communicate clearly and effectively to expert and non-expert audiences. As is the case across the ECB, we continue to embed the latest technologies. For example, together with my colleagues, I am applying artificial intelligence techniques to help enhance the efficiency of our processes.
Reflecting on this long and exciting journey, I am proud to have done my part in establishing the ECB as a world-class institution that keeps prices stable and the financial system safe for around 350 million people in the euro area. I am also grateful for having been empowered to grow professionally and personally throughout my career at the ECB.
Ten years later, when the ECB became host to the independent European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) in the wake of the financial crisis, I had the chance to try something new. In early 2010 I was asked to be the project manager to establish the ESRB. A year later I was appointed Head of the ESRB Secretariat. Since then I have genuinely enjoyed every single day working to preserve the resilience of the financial sector in a broad institutional setting alongside the central banks and supervisors at European and national level as well as an exceptional group of colleagues from the ECB and the ESRB member institutions.
When I joined the European Monetary Institute in 1995, I was among the first hundred colleagues tasked with the preparatory work for the introduction of the euro as the single currency for Europe. In 1998 I quickly learned how the ECB works together with the national central banks. I was thrilled to help coordinate the overall testing and to see that the newly established systems worked well, whether conducting monetary policy operations, executing payments or collecting statistics across Europe.
Encouraged by the ECB’s objective to foster internal mobility, I worked in six different business areas (Payments, IT, HR, Secretariat, Statistics and Markets). This allowed me to increase my knowledge of core aspects of central banking and hone my skills in project management, people management and leadership. I felt stimulated by the exposure to diverse perspectives and thinking styles and was also able to build lasting networks and friendships across Europe.
I am inspired by the ECB’s mission and proud to have contributed to the success of change management initiatives for the benefit of Europe. One such example is the roll-out of our document and records management system, which is key to sharing and distributing information efficiently among colleagues in the national central banks and safeguarding the ECB’s institutional memory.
I am now very happy to be responsible for the Financial Operations Services Division. I like being close to the markets and enjoy the mixture of daily operations and interesting projects that involves cooperating with many different ECB business areas, central banks and external partners. Just recently, we established fiscal and paying agency services for the European Commission.
In my free time, I love reading, cooking and hiking. I am an active member of the ECB’s hiking club, which is a great opportunity to meet colleagues outside of work and to get out into nature in different parts of Europe.